BITDB PROTOTYPE-1
AI-NATIVE, SSD-FIRST INFERENCE DATABASE
Design and implementation specification
Date: 2026-08-22

1. PURPOSE AND RESEARCH HYPOTHESIS

BitDB is a storage and retrieval engine that sits beside an AI model. It stores
embeddings, metadata, relationships, text chunks, and original files under one
logical identity, then returns an AI-ready evidence bundle in one retrieval
operation.

The research hypothesis is not that SSD vector search is new. DiskANN, PageANN,
Zoom, SPANN, PipeANN, Starling, and related systems already establish that
direction. The testable BitDB hypothesis is:

An AI-native storage layout and query planner that jointly optimizes vector
search, metadata filtering, chunk retrieval, caching, prefetching, and context
assembly can reduce AI time-to-context and total coordination overhead under a
fixed RAM budget, while preserving recall and evidence accuracy.

The primary optimization target is time-to-answer, not an isolated ANN number.
BitDB must therefore expose both low-level database operations and a high-level
AI_SEARCH operation.

2. DESIGN PRINCIPLES

1. SSD-first persistence: the full corpus and durable indexes live on SSD; RAM
   contains a bounded, adaptive working set.
2. One identity across data types: document_id and chunk_id connect blobs,
   metadata, vectors, provenance, and access history.
3. Read the minimum useful bytes: use compressed preview vectors for routing,
   page-aligned graph records for traversal, and full vectors/content only for
   candidates that survive filtering and reranking.
4. Co-design logical and physical locality: items likely to be retrieved
   together should share pages or nearby extents.
5. Asynchronous by default: batch and overlap SSD reads using io_uring or an
   equivalent asynchronous I/O interface.
6. Dynamic and measurable: updates are first-class, index quality is monitored,
   and every result carries provenance and retrieval telemetry.
7. Evidence before generation: BitDB returns source spans, scores, filters,
   versions, and confidence signals so the AI can cite and validate content.

3. UNIQUE BITDB CONTRIBUTION

The unique prototype feature is the Retrieval Capsule. A Retrieval Capsule is a
physically co-located, versioned record containing:

  - a small quantized preview embedding;
  - graph/page routing information;
  - document and chunk identifiers;
  - compact filterable metadata;
  - a pointer to the full vector;
  - a pointer to the source-content extent;
  - provenance, version, ACL, and freshness fields.

The vector index does not return an orphan vector ID. It returns a capsule ID
that lets BitDB fetch metadata and content through the same locality-aware read
plan. This is the architectural bridge between vector databases, KV stores,
and object stores.

BitDB also introduces a Context Utility Score for cache and prefetch decisions:

  utility = predicted_reuse * answer_value * freshness_value
            - read_cost - memory_cost - staleness_risk

The score is initially computed with an interpretable heuristic. Later it can
be replaced by a small online model. This keeps Prototype-1 reproducible while
leaving a clear research contribution: learning which data is useful to the AI,
not merely which page was recently touched.

4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

Client / AI agent
        |
BitDB API and AI query planner
        |
Query execution pipeline
  1. normalize request and compile metadata/ACL filters
  2. check result and capsule caches
  3. preview search over in-RAM quantized vectors and page centroids
  4. page-graph traversal with batched asynchronous reads
  5. filter candidates using compact metadata
  6. full-vector reranking on SSD candidates or GPU/CPU
  7. fetch only winning content spans
  8. assemble ordered evidence capsules with citations
        |
Storage manager
  RAM: query state, hot capsules, centroids, compact preview vectors,
       routing table, bloom/filter structures, recent content
  SSD: WAL, immutable segments, page graph, full vectors, metadata, blobs,
       manifests, statistics

The engine should be a single local process for Prototype-1 to remove network
round trips. A future distributed mode can shard page ranges and retain the
same API.

5. ON-DISK FORMAT

Use a segment-based format inspired by LSM storage, but specialized for AI
retrieval. Each segment is immutable after sealing and has a manifest.

Segment files:

  manifest.bin       magic, version, counts, checksums, model/dimension IDs
  capsules.bin       fixed-size capsule headers and variable metadata pointers
  preview.bin        int8/PQ preview vectors, SIMD-friendly and page packed
  pages.bin          page-aligned graph nodes, representatives, neighbor IDs
  full_vectors.bin   float16/float32 vectors, grouped by capsule/page locality
  metadata.bin       compact typed columns and filter indexes
  content.bin        compressed chunk text or blob references
  stats.bin          centroids, quantization parameters, access statistics

All offsets are 64-bit relative offsets. Pages have a fixed configurable size
(start with 16 KiB or the device's useful read unit). Each page contains its
own neighbor IDs and compressed routing data so graph traversal does not need a
second metadata read. Every record has a checksum and generation number.

The WAL records PUT, DELETE, UPDATE, and model/schema changes. On restart,
BitDB replays the WAL, opens valid manifests, and ignores incomplete segments.
Background compaction merges segments, removes tombstones, rebuilds locality,
and atomically publishes a new manifest.

6. INDEXING STRATEGY

Prototype-1 uses a two-level page graph:

  A. Build page nodes by clustering nearby embeddings and packing their
     representatives into one physical SSD page.
  B. Connect page nodes with a bounded navigable graph.
  C. Keep a small centroid/routing index in RAM.
  D. Store a compact preview vector for every capsule in RAM when budget allows;
     otherwise store previews by page and promote hot pages.
  E. Use full vectors only for final reranking.

This combines the ideas supported by the corpus: page-aligned graphs and
representatives, preview/full-view search, compressed vectors, locality-aware
colocation, SSD parallelism, and lightweight memory indexes.

To support updates, new writes first enter a mutable memory buffer and WAL.
When the buffer reaches a threshold it becomes a small immutable segment. Query
execution searches the base index plus recent segments and merges results.
Deletes are tombstones. Compaction restores graph quality and removes stale
records. This avoids requiring a full rebuild for every document update.

7. QUERY EXECUTION

Low-level operations:

  put(key, value)
  get(key)
  delete(key)
  put_document(document_id, metadata, content)
  put_chunk(document_id, chunk_id, text, embedding, metadata)
  search_vector(vector, k, filters, rerank=true)
  fetch_content(chunk_ids, byte_budget)

The principal operation is:

  AI_SEARCH(query_vector, filters, top_k, content_mode, token_budget,
            freshness, diversity, return_provenance=true)

Execution details:

  1. Parse filters into a fast typed predicate. Reject unauthorized capsules
     before content reads.
  2. Generate a query preview and probe the result/capsule cache.
  3. Search centroids and preview vectors to produce an oversampled candidate
     set, for example 10x top_k.
  4. Traverse page nodes. Submit independent SSD reads concurrently; do not
     force a strict compute-read-compute sequence.
  5. Apply metadata, tenant, ACL, time, and freshness filters before expensive
     reranking whenever safe.
  6. Rerank candidates with full vectors. Optionally use GPU batches when the
     queue and batch size justify transfer cost.
  7. Fetch only the selected chunk spans. Prefer neighboring chunks when the
     token budget permits and the access model predicts they improve context.
  8. Deduplicate by document, apply diversity/MMR, enforce token budget, and
     return capsules ordered by evidence utility.
  9. Record latency, bytes, page reads, cache decisions, scores, and misses.

Result shape:

  {chunk_id, document_id, text, metadata, similarity, rerank_score,
   source_uri, page_or_offset, model_id, content_version, freshness,
   access_reason, evidence_hash}

8. CACHE, PREFETCH, AND I/O CONTROL

Use separate bounded pools for routing pages, preview vectors, capsules,
metadata, full vectors, and content. A single global LRU would let large blobs
evict the small structures needed for routing.

Start with segmented CLOCK/LRU plus admission control. Track reuse distance,
query locality, filter selectivity, co-accessed capsule IDs, and cache hit rate.
Promote a page only when its utility exceeds the admission threshold.

Prefetch rules for Prototype-1:

  - prefetch neighboring page nodes when graph traversal confidence is high;
  - prefetch metadata and content extents co-accessed by recent queries;
  - never prefetch content that fails a known filter or ACL;
  - limit prefetch queue depth and cancel stale requests;
  - compare predicted usefulness with actual usefulness.

Use asynchronous batched reads, aligned buffers, direct I/O where measured to
be beneficial, and per-device queue-depth control. The scheduler should avoid
head-of-line blocking between latency-sensitive AI_SEARCH requests and bulk
ingestion/compaction.

9. IMPLEMENTATION PLAN

Recommended first implementation language: Rust or C++ for the storage and I/O
core, with a Python SDK and benchmark harness. Rust is preferred for memory
safety and a clean async interface. Use Apache Arrow or a simple binary ABI for
zero-copy result transfer.

Phase 1: single-node foundation
  - repository layout, configuration, checksums, fixed-size pages;
  - WAL, recovery, segment manifest, atomic publish;
  - KV and blob/chunk APIs;
  - RAM cache and metrics endpoint.

Phase 2: retrieval capsules and ingestion
  - document/chunk schema and provenance;
  - deterministic chunking and embedding-model ID tracking;
  - typed metadata columns, ACL fields, tombstones;
  - capsule packing and locality statistics.

Phase 3: vector search
  - page graph builder;
  - int8/PQ preview vectors;
  - centroid routing index;
  - asynchronous page reads;
  - full-vector reranking and Recall@K tests.

Phase 4: unified AI retrieval
  - AI_SEARCH planner;
  - filter pushdown, capsule cache, content fetch;
  - token-aware context assembly, deduplication, MMR;
  - provenance and evidence hashes.

Phase 5: adaptive storage manager
  - co-access graph;
  - utility-based admission and prefetch;
  - page placement and compaction optimization;
  - optional learned policy trained only from logged outcomes.

Phase 6: research evaluation and paper
  - reproducible datasets, fixed RAM budgets, baselines, ablations;
  - publish the workload model, layout, policies, and negative results.

10. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

Baselines:
  - FAISS or an equivalent in-memory ANN baseline;
  - DiskANN/PageANN-style disk ANN baseline;
  - a conventional vector DB + KV DB + object store pipeline;
  - a simple BitDB ablation without co-location and adaptive caching.

Measure:
  - Recall@K and nDCG/answer-evidence precision;
  - P50/P95/P99 vector and AI_SEARCH latency;
  - QPS and concurrent-request throughput;
  - peak RAM, bytes per vector, SSD footprint, and index build time;
  - SSD reads, bytes read, read amplification, queue depth;
  - cache hit/miss rate, eviction rate, useful-prefetch rate;
  - time-to-context, context assembly time, network calls, and time-to-answer;
  - update freshness, delete visibility, compaction cost, and crash recovery.

Run controlled experiments at several dataset/RAM ratios, query distributions,
filter selectivities, update rates, and token budgets. Report confidence
intervals and separate cold-cache from warm-cache results. Never present the
illustrative overview numbers as measured results.

Critical ablations:
  1. unified retrieval versus three independent services;
  2. co-located capsules versus random placement;
  3. page graph versus vector-node graph;
  4. preview/full-view versus full-vector search;
  5. adaptive utility cache versus LRU/CLOCK;
  6. asynchronous batched I/O versus synchronous reads;
  7. dynamic segments versus periodic full rebuilds.

11. ACCURACY AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

BitDB must not silently return stale or unauthorized information. Every capsule
has a content version, embedding model ID, ACL/tenant scope, source location,
and hash. Updates invalidate affected caches. Filter and ACL checks happen
before content exposure. If a result is approximate, the response says so and
includes the search configuration.

For RAG, preserve exact source spans and document identifiers. The LLM adapter
must receive structured evidence rather than only concatenated text. This
allows citation, debugging, groundedness evaluation, and replay of a retrieval
decision.

12. EXPECTED RESEARCH PAPER CLAIM

The defensible paper claim for Prototype-1 is conditional and measurable:

BitDB presents an AI-native SSD-first storage layout and retrieval planner that
co-locates vector previews, routing information, metadata, and content pointers
in retrieval capsules. Under bounded RAM and dynamic RAG workloads, we evaluate
whether joint placement, page-aware asynchronous search, and workload-aware
cache/prefetch decisions reduce time-to-context and storage coordination cost
while preserving retrieval quality.

Do not claim that BitDB replaces DiskANN, invents SSD ANN, or is universally
faster. The research value is the unified end-to-end hypothesis and the
controlled evidence showing when the design helps and when it does not.

13. CORPUS USED FOR THIS SPECIFICATION

This specification was derived from BitDB_Complete_Idea_Overview.pdf, 130
paper summaries in papers/, 64 PDFs in pdfs/, and six close-topic PDFs. The
dominant research themes were disk-resident ANN, page-aligned graphs, modern
SSD parallelism, in-storage/near-data processing, quantization and reranking,
dynamic vector indexing, out-of-core execution, heterogeneous memory tiers,
locality-aware placement, and adaptive/ML cache management.

Prototype-1 is an implementation and research plan, not a claim that the
system has already been built or benchmarked.
