Memory management is the process of controlling and coordinating computer memory, assigning blocks to programs.
Physical memory refers to the actual RAM hardware address space available on the system.
Virtual memory is a memory management technique that provides an idealized abstraction of storage resources.
The Memory Management Unit (MMU) is a hardware component that translates virtual addresses to physical ones.
Logical addresses are generated by the CPU, whereas physical addresses are loaded into the memory register.
Base and limit registers define the logical address space boundaries for a process to ensure isolation.
Fragmentation is the waste of memory space; it can be classified as internal or external fragmentation.
Internal fragmentation occurs when allocated memory blocks are slightly larger than requested memory.
External fragmentation occurs when total free memory is sufficient for a request, but not contiguous.
Paging is a memory management scheme that eliminates the need for contiguous physical memory allocation.
Virtual memory is divided into fixed-size blocks called pages; physical memory is divided into frames.
The page table maps page numbers in virtual memory to frame numbers in physical memory.
A Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) is a hardware cache used to speed up virtual address translation.
Page faults occur when a process accesses a page that is mapped to virtual space but not loaded in RAM.
On a page fault, the OS must fetch the required page from disk storage into a free frame in physical RAM.
Page replacement algorithms determine which page to swap out when physical memory is completely full.
FIFO (First-In, First-Out) page replacement swaps out the page that has been in memory the longest.
LRU (Least Recently Used) page replacement swaps out the page that has not been accessed for the longest time.
Optimal page replacement swaps out the page that will not be used for the longest period in the future.
Belady's Anomaly is the phenomenon where increasing the number of page frames results in more page faults.
Segmentation divides logical memory into variable-sized segments representing logical program units.
Virtual memory swapping involves moving entire processes between main memory and secondary storage disk.
Thrashing occurs when a system spends more time servicing page faults than executing actual instructions.
Dynamic linking defers the linking of libraries until the program is executed to save memory.
Memory compaction merges free memory fragments into a single contiguous block to resolve external fragmentation.
